covered action in Chile 1963 to 1973
chapter 5 preliminary conclusions
underlying all discussion of American
interference in the internal affairs of
Chile is the basic question of why the
United States initially mounted such an
extensive cover action program in Chile
and why it continued and even expanded
in the early 1970s covered action has
been a key element of US foreign policy
towards chilling the link between
covered action and foreign policy was
obvious throughout the decade between
1964 in 1974 in 1964 the United States
commitment to democratic reform via the
Alliance for Progress and overt foreign
aid was buttressed via covered support
for the election of the candidate of the
Christian Democratic Party a candidate
in a party for which the Alliance seemed
tailor-made during nineteen seventy the
US government tried covered Lee to
prevent agenda from becoming president
of chile when that failed covered
support to his opposition from one of a
trial of official actions covered a two
opposition forces cool but correct
diplomatic posture and economic pressure
from support of what the United States
considered to be democratic and
progressive forces in Chile we have
moved finally to advocating and
encouraging the overthrow of a
democratically elected government a
covered action and US foreign policy in
1964 the United States became massively
involved in covered activity in Chile
this involvement was seen by US
policymakers as consistent with overall
American foreign policy and the goals of
the Alliance for Progress the election
of a moderate left candidate in Chile
was a cornerstone of US policy toward
Latin America it is unclear from the
record whether the 1964 election project
was intended to be a one-time
intervention in support of a good cause
it is clear that the scale of the
involvement generated commitment and
expectations on both sides for the
United State
it created assets and channels of
funding which could be used again for
the Chilean groups receiving CIA funds
that funding became an expectation
counted upon thus when opposition to
again that became the primary objective
of covered action in 1970 the structure
for covert action developed through
covered assistance to political parties
in 1964 was well established a
fundamental question raised by the
parent of us covered activities persist
did the threat to vital US national
security interest posed by the
presidency of salvador allende justified
the several major cover attempts to
prevent his ascension to power three
American presidents and their senior
advisers evidently thought so when
rationale for cover interaction in
Chilean politics was spell out by henry
kissinger in his background briefing to
the press on September 16th 1970 the day
after Nixon's meeting with Helms he
argued that an agenda victory would be
irreversible with in Chile might affect
neighboring nation and with post massive
problems for the u.s. in Latin America
quote I have yet to meet somebody who
firmly believes that if I Enda wins
there is likely to be another free
election for Chile now it is fairly easy
for one to predict that if I genda wins
there is a good chance that he will
establish over a period of years some
sort of communist government in that
case we would have not we will have one
nut of an island of the coast Cuba which
has not a traditional relationship and
impact on Latin America but in a major
Latin American country you would have a
communist government joining for example
Argentine Peru and Bolivia so I don't
think we should delude ourselves of an
agenda take over and chill it would not
present massive problems for us and for
democratic forces and for pro US forces
in Latin America and indeed to the whole
Western Hemisphere and quote another
rationale for us involvement in the
internal affairs of Chile was
offered by a high-ranking officer who
testified before the committee he spoke
of Jillian's position in a worldwide
strategic chess game in 1917 and this
analogy Portugal might be a bishop Chile
a couple of poems perhaps more in the
worldwide strategic chess game once a
position was lost a series of
consequences followed us enemies would
proceed to exploit the new opportunity
in our ability to cope with the
challenge will be limited by any
American loss be executive command and
control of major covered action in
pursuing the Chilean chess game
particularly the efforts to prevent
attendance ascension to power or his
maintaining power once elected executive
command and control of major covered
action was tied and well-directed
procedures within the CIA for
controlling the programs were well
defined and the procedures made station
officials accountable to their
supervisors in Washington unilateral
actions on the part of the stations were
virtually impossible but the central
issue of command and control is
accountability procedures for ensuring
that covered actions are and remain
accountable both to the senior political
and foreign policy officials of the
executive branch and to the Congress the
record of cover activities in children
suggests that although established
executive processes of al-faour ization
and control are generally other two
there were and remain genuine
shortcomings to this process s decisions
about which covered action projects are
submitted to the 40 committee where and
are made within the CIA on the basis of
the agency's determination of the
political sensitivity of a project the
form in which cover action projects were
cleared with ambassadors and other state
Department officials buried it dependent
and still depends on how interest
ambassadors are and how forthcoming
their station Chiefs are once major
projects are approved by the 40
committee they opt-in continue without
searching
examination by the committee the agency
conducts annual reviews of ongoing
project but the 40 committee does not
undertake a review unless a project is
recommended for renewal or there is some
important change in contact or amount
there is also the problem of controlling
clandestine projects not labeled covered
action clandestine collection of human
intelligence is not the subject of 40
committee review but those projects may
be just as politically sensitive as a
covered action witness us contacts with
a Chilean military during 1972 1973
similarly for security reasons
ambassadors generally no CIA assets only
by general description not by name that
practice may be acceptable provided the
description is detailed enough to inform
the ambassador of the risk posed by the
development of a particular assets and
to allow the Ambassador to decide
whether or not that asset should be used
that remains the question of the dangers
which arise when the very mechanism
established by the executive branch of
ensuring internal accountability are
circumvented or frustrated by
presidential instruction truck two was
to be operated without informing the US
ambassador in Santiago the State
Department or any 40 committee member
save Henry Kissinger the president and
his senior advisers first denied
themselves the government's major
sources of counsel about Chilean
politics and the Ambassador in Santiago
was left in the position of having to
deal with any adverse political
spillover from a project of which he was
not informed the danger was greater
still whenever the truth about
communication between CIA and the white
house after October fifteenth nineteen
seventy an issue which is the subject of
conflicting testimony all participants
agreed the track to constitute a broad
mandate to the CIA the agency was given
to believe it had virtual carte blanche
Authority moreover it fell under extreme
pressure
to prevent agenda from company to power
by military coup if necessary it was
given little guidance about what
subsequent clearances needed to obtain
from the White House under these
conditions CIA consultation with the
White House in advance of the specific
actions was less than meticulous see the
role of Congress in the hand of Congress
rest the responsibility for ensuring
that the executive branch is held to
full political accountability for
covered activities the record on Csilla
is mixed and muted by its incompleteness
CIA records note a number of briefings
of congressional committees about
covered action in Chile those records
however do not reveal the timelines or
the level of detail of these briefings
indeed the record suggests that the
briefings were often after the fact and
incomplete the situation improved after
1973 apparently as congressional
committees became more persistent in the
exercise of their oversight function
furthermore section 66 two of the
foreign assistance act should make it
impossible for major projects to be
operated without the appropriate
congressional committees being informed
the record leaves unanswered a number of
questions this pertain both to how
forthcoming the agency was and how
interest and persist in the
congressional committees where where
members of Congress for instance given
the opportunity to object to a specific
projects before the projects were
implemented did they want to there is
also an issue of jurisdiction CIA and
State Department officials have taken
the position that they are authorized to
reveal agency operations only to the
appropriate oversight committees d
intelligent judgments and covered
operations a review of the intelligent
judgments on Chile offered by us
analysts during the critical period from
1972 1973 has not established whether
dis judgments were taken into account
when US policymakers from
and approved us covered operations this
examination of the relevant intelligent
estimate and memoranda has established
that the judgment of the analyst
suggested caution and restraint while
the political imperatives demanded
action even within the Central
Intelligence Agency processes from being
considered judgments of intelligent
analyst to bear on proposed covered
action we're hapas art and generally
ineffective this situation has improved
covered action proposals now regularly
come before the deputy director for
intelligence and the appropriate
national intelligence officer but the
operators still are separated from the
intelligent analyst those whose
exclusive business it is to understand
and predict foreign politics for
instance the analyst who dropped the
government's most prestigious
intelligence analysis ni es may not even
have known of us covered actions in
Chile the chilling experience does
suggest that the committee keeps serious
consideration to the possibility that
lodging the responsibility for national
estimates and conduct of operational
activities with the same person the
director of Central Intelligence creates
an inner end conflict of interest and
judgment F effects of major covered
action programs covered action programs
as costly and as complex as several
mounted by the United States in Chile
are unlikely to remain covered in Chile
in 1964 there was simply too much
unexplained money too many left debts
too many broadcast but the United States
was involved in the election has been
taken for granted in Latin America for
many years the involvement in 1964
created a presumption in Chile and
elsewhere in Latin America that the
United States government would again be
involved in 1970 these made secrecy
still harder to maintain even though the
CIA involvement was much smaller in 1970
that he had been in 1964 when covered
actions in Chile became public knowledge
costs were obvious the United States was
seen by its covered actions to have
contradicted not only its official
declarations but its treaty commitments
and principles of long standing at the
same time it was proclaiming a low
profile in Latin American relations the
US government was seeking to foment a
coop in Chile the cost of major covered
ventures which are blown are clear
enough but there may be caused to pay
even if the operations could remain
secret for long periods of time some of
these costs may accrue even with the
calculus of covered operations successes
may turn to failures several officials
from home the committee took testimony
suggested that the poor showing of the
Chilean Christian Democrats in 1970 was
in some part attributable to previous
American covered support of course there
were many causes of that poor showing
but in 1964 the PDC had been spared the
need of developing some of its own
grassroots organization the CIA did much
of that for it in 1917 with less CIA
activity on behalf of the Christian
Democratic Party the PDC flattered of
course the more important cost even for
covered actions which remain secret are
those two American ideals of relation
among nations and of constitutional
government in the case of Chile some of
those calls were far from abstract
witnessed the involvement of United
States military officers in the track to
attempt to overthrow a constitutionally
elected civilian government there are
also long-term effects of covered
actions many of those may be adverse
they touch American as well as foreign
institutions the Chilean institutions
that the United States most favored may
have been discredited within their own
societies by the fact of their covert
support in Latin America particularly
even the suspicion of CIA support maybe
the kiss of death it would be the final
irony of a decade of covered
action in Chile if that action destroyed
the credibility of the Chilean Christian
Democrats the effects on American
institutions are less obvious but not
less important II was private and
governmental institutions with overt
legitimate purposes of their own may
have been discredited by the
pervasiveness of covered action even if
particular institutions were not
involved in covered action they may have
been corrupted in the perceptions of
Latin Americans because of the perseus
pneus of clandestine us activity in the
end the whole of us policymaking may be
affected the availability of an extra
means make outer officials assessment of
the costs and rationales of overt
policies it may postpone the day with
outmoded policies are abandoned and new
ones adopted arguably the 1964 election
project was part of a progressive
approach to Chile the project was
justified if perhaps not actually
sustained by the desire to elect
democratic reformers by 1970 covered
action had become completely defensive
in character to prevent the election of
agenda the United States professed a low
profile but at the same time acted
Coverly to ensure that the Chilean
elections came out right low-profile
notwithstanding a special case for
concern is the relationship between
intelligence agencies and multinational
corporations in 1970 newest government
policy prohibited covered CIA support to
a single party or candidate at the same
time the CIA provided advice to an
american-based multinational corporation
on how to furnish just such direct
support that raised all of the dangers
of exposure and eliminated many of the
safeguards and control normally present
in exclusively CIA covered operations
there was the appearance of an
improperly close relationship between
the CIA and multinational companies when
former director John McCone use contacts
and information gained while at the CIA
to advise a corporation on whose board
of director he said disappearance was
hiding it because the contact between
the agency and the corporation in 1970
extended to discussing and even planet
corporate intervention in the Chilean
electoral process the problem of
cooperation x.x activated when a
cooperating company such as IT team is
called to give testimony before an
appropriate congressional committee the
agency may then be confronted with a
question of whether to come forward to
set the record straight when it believes
that testimony given on behalf of a
cooperating company is untrue the
situation is difficult for in coming
forward the agency may reveal sensitive
sources and methods by which it learned
the facts or may make public the
existence of ongoing covert operations
this report does not attempt to offer a
final judgment on the political property
the morality or even the effectiveness
of American cover activity in Chile did
the threat posed by an agenda presidency
justify covered American involvement in
Chile there is justified the specific
and unusual attempt to ferment a
military coup to deny agenda the
presidency in 1970 the u.s. sought to
foster a military coup bean chili to
prevent agendas ascension to power yet
after nineteen seventy the government
according to the testimony of Puppets
officials did not engage in coop
plotting was nineteen seventy a mistake
an aberration or was the threat posed to
the national security interest of the
United States so grave that the
government was remiss in not seeking his
downfall directly during 1972 1973 what
responsibility does the United States
bear for the cruelty and political
suppression but have become the hallmark
of the present regime in Chile on these
questions committee members may differ
so my American citizens yet the
committee's mandate is less to judge the
past than to recommend for the future
moving from
past cases to future guidelines what is
important to note is that covered action
has been perceived as a middle ground
between diplomatic representation and
the overt use of military force in the
case of Chile that middle ground may
have been far too broad given the cost
of covered action it should be resorted
to only to counter severe threat to the
national security of the United States
it is far from clear that that was the
case in Chile